# Title: Quantitative paleoecology in the era of big data: Trends, challenges, and opportunities

**Organisers**: Erin Dillon (Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute), Suzette Flantua (University of Bergen), Maria A. Hurtado-Materon (Texas A&M), A. Michelle Lawing (Texas A&M), Jenny McGuire (Georgia Tech), Leila Siciliano-Martina (Texas State), Oscar Wilson (University of Helsinki)

## Description

Quantitative paleoecology has advanced substantially with the development of new statistical tools, computational capacities, and the availability of large datasets like the Neotoma Paleoecology Database and the Paleobiology Database. This symposium focuses on how quantitative approaches are reshaping our ability to reconstruct past environments and biogeographies, detect ecological thresholds, and understand long-term biodiversity and climate dynamics from regional to global scales.

With the increasing demand for robust baselines to contextualize current and future ecological change, this theme is both timely and critical. While large datasets are now easily accessible, expert-based data handling remains essential for producing reliable results. This can easily be overlooked, as community guidelines for best practices are still in development. At the same time, the field is transitioning from site-specific analyses toward large-scale syntheses, systematically applying quantitative methods to hundreds or thousands of records. This scaling-up brings new challenges related to methodological consistency, temporal and spatial uncertainty, and the interpretation of heterogeneous records.

Contributions will span methodological innovations, critical approaches to data handling, continental and global-scale syntheses, and interdisciplinary studies. As a case study, the symposium will have specific focus on ecometrics, a subfield of quantitative paleoecology relating community trait distributions to environmental factors. Traditionally, ecometrics has been used to evaluate fossil community assemblages as proxies for paleoenvironmental conditions, though utility of ecometric methods has been expanding over the past several years, with applications to global change past, present, and future. Accelerating these efforts are a series of new tools and databases for analyzing community-level, trait-environment relationships. The symposium will foster dialogue between paleoecologists, biogeographers, and modelers, emphasizing cross-disciplinary insights and future research priorities for a data-rich, macroecological paleoecology to explore community-level responses to global change.
